Implementation notes
--------------------

The following are general points about the implementation of the quaternion
toolbox. It is intended to expand these notes in due course to give more
detailed information about the design of the toolbox.

1. The representation of a quaternion is hidden in a small number of private
functions. This is to keep the bulk of the functions in the library separate
from the representation, and to facilitate a later change of representation
if needed.
    
2. Functions which are overloadings of Matlab functions generally take the
same parameters as the Matlab function, but there are some exceptions where
the Matlab function seemed to have unnecessary parameter combinations that
are of little use.

3. Functions are inherently matrix-oriented as with standard Matlab functions.

4. Errors are limited to cases where parameters are incorrect or not supported.

5. Warnings are issued in cases where a result will be incorrect (for example
a NaN, but the computation is not stopped). Generally the problem should be
fixed at a higher level than the point where the warning occurs. If this is in
one of the functions of the toolbox, the problem should be reported, otherwise
if it is user code it should be fixed there.

6. Because the toolbox is designed to work with complexified quaternions (that
is quaternions in which the four components are complex), there are some tricks
in some of the functions. The modulus of a complex quaternion is complex, and it
may be zero. This has many ramifications. One example suffices to illustrate the
tricks needed. In the function unit.m, it is necessary to divide a quaternion by
its modulus. There is an error check in the function to give a warning if any
element of the quaternion array has zero modulus (in fact less than epsilon),
but since the modulus may be complex, it is abs(m) that is compared with eps and
not m itself. Note that if the modulus is real, abs(m) == m, and the abs
function has no effect, whereas, if the modulus is complex, abs(m) is real, and
it can only be zero if the modulus is zero.

7. The overloading of the Matlab functions real, imag and conj is important.
real and imag operate exactly as their complex counterparts. Applied to a
complex quaternion they return a real quaternion which is the real or imaginary
part of the complex quaternion, exactly analogous to the complex case. conj,
however, is different since it returns the quaternion conjugate by default - the
vector part is negated not the complex part of the components. To obtain the
complex conjugate a second parameter is needed. There is also a total conjugate,
which means both the quaternion and complex conjugates are applied. The reason
for making the default the quaternion conjugate is subtle: conj is used in
ctranspose and in inverse, and in both of these cases it must be the quaternion
conjugate. Therefore for consistency, conj is the quaternion conjugate. The use
of a different name (e.g. qconj) was considered but the problem of the '
operator (conjugate transpose) would remain. It is clear that this operator
should implement the quaternion conjugate transpose because it is this transpose
that is needed most often and not the complex conjugate transpose. We can't
introduce a new operator into Matlab. If we want a complex conjugate transpose
we have to write conj(A.', 'complex').

8. Indexing within class methods. Matlab does not support normal array indexing
within a class method. If used, an obscure error occurs which has tripped us up
more than once. The class methods are all the M-functions inside the @quaternion
directory and its sub-directories. If normal array indexing notation is employed
inside any of these functions to index a quaternion array (but *not* other types
of arrays such as real or string), then Matlab will fail to call the quaternion
subsref function. Instead, it will call its own built-in subsref function, and
the obscure error message "??? Index exceeds matrix dimensions." will usually
occur. The workaround for this is to use the quaternion subsref function explictly.
This is made slightly easier by using the substruct function to construct the
necessary arguments. For example, the simple indexing operation q(k) has to be
coded as subsref(q, substruct('()', {k})). To see more elaborate examples, search
in the @quaternion directory for files containing 'substruct'. A brief mention of
this can be found in the Matlab documentation under: Programming/Classes and
Objects/Designing User Classes, under the title: Object Indexing within Methods.
In more recent versions of Matlab, the help information has been reorganized
and the most relevant section is headed (use search to find it):
'subsref and subsasgn Within Class Methods ? Built-In Called'.

Steve Sangwine
Nicolas Le Bihan

Email: sjs@essex.ac.uk, nicolas.le-bihan@lis.inpg.fr

LIS, Grenoble
July 2005
Amended March 2006, March 2008, November 2009.
$Id: Implementation_notes.txt,v 1.3 2011/01/05 20:57:08 sangwine Exp $
